Part 1: Visualization critique
==============================

**Selected visualization:**

**Article tittle:** Gender pay gap: what we learned and how to fix it
First graph in the article.

**Link to data visualization: **
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/ng-interactive/2018/apr/05/women-are-paid-less-than-men-heres-how-to-fix-it>

### Critique

The figure above was retrieved from the article *Gender pay gap: what we
learned and how to fix it* published by The Guardian on April 4, 2018.
The authors use this visualization to display data from a survey
administered to employers with more than 250 employees in Great Britain,
excluding Northern Ireland. Throughout the article, the authors use
additional figures to display other features of the survey.

The graphic shows the distribution of the gender gap for the sample of
employers that reported information on the gender gap. There are several
aspects to take into account regarding the truthfulness of the figure.
Initially, we can say that the figure is truthful since it just displays
the reported gender gap for each employer in the data set. However, some
aspects of the figure can lead the reader to misleading conclusions.

The main consideration regarding the truthfulness of the figure is that
the x-axis has no label. It would require the reader to go through the
whole article to conclude that the percentages in the x-axis indicate
the gender gap. Moreover, it is still not clear how the gap index is
calculated. Is it the proportion of the average (or median) wage for
females relative to men???s average wage? Is it the proportion of women
that are paid more than men? There are many possibilities to interpret
the percentages in the x-axis.

Another important aspect is that it is not clear what was the criterion
to select the employers whose name appear in the figure. There might be
some political or economic interest behind the selection of these firms.
Finally, the proportion of employers that reported information is not
included in the visualization. This might lead to the mistaken
interpretations regarding the representativeness of the data.

Excluding the caveats of the graph mentioned before, the figure is
visibly functional. The graph clearly communicates the message that
women are paid less than men. This functionality is limited, given the
parts of information that are currently missing. However, the inclusion
of this information would make the graph easy to read. In addition,
including in the figure a title, source of the data and details on the
methodology of the survey and gap index would make the figure stand by
itself.

The selection of colors makes the graph appealing to the reader. In
general, the typography, font size, and font color are nice and
contribute to making the graph easy to read. The figure could be
improved by increasing the intensity of the font color in some notes and
labels currently displayed in light gray.

The figure is insightful since it communicates new information. The
article was published the day after the deadline for employers to submit
their information to the survey, meaning that the figure was generated
just after information was received. It is likely that by the time the
figure was published, not many other sources to access information from
this data source were available.

Finally, the visualization is enlightening, since it provides a source
to compare gender gaps in different industries. However, it could be
improved if the names of all the employers, or at least those over a
certain threshold of the number of employees where released.
